hey everyone thanks for showing up
my name is Adina and I'm part of the
cycle climatic slab in Ireland seventh
and I'm standing here today to talk a
bit about data management with a
software tool called data lat this is
intended as a smallish workshop and for
everyone who has their computers with
them you are invited to code along once
we reach that step in this workshop for
the first part I'm just going to talk a
bit of a couple of slides later on you
can decide whether you want to follow
along or not but there will be materials
for you to revise everything that I'm
going through as well at any later point
so let me start by motivating a bit why
we are here why I am standing here
talking when we talk about research data
management what do we mean by research
data in principle it's every single
digital object that is involved in your
data analysis project in your science
that can be code be that code that
you've made yourself or code that you
got from us or others or from the
internet software tools either you wrote
them yourself or you're just using them
in their specific versions raw data that
you base your analyses on all the
processed data that you either create or
base your analysis on the results of
your science up to the published
manuscript all of that is research data
and each of these objects needs to be
properly managed not only once but
throughout its entire lifecycle it's
starting from basically designing a
study from the creation of a research
data object to its used with publication
to sharing the research object with
others archiving it reusing it
destroying it and so forth so this is
graphic by the JSE details a bit how
impressive the research data management
lifecycle is it's basically throughout
the entire lifecycle of a research data
object that you have to take care of it
and the reason why we
such data management is made important
is not because there are some say this
bureaucrat somewhere who imposes that
upon you but because research data
management is actually a key component
for our producer bility for efficiency
and for the region impact of your data
science project so research data
management should be something that
every one of us should be fairly
concerned with and I want to give you a
couple of examples or demonstrations on
why you might be motivated to care about
research data management this is a
metaphor for a common paper when it is
published this beautiful mermaid is the
paper as it is presented to the readers
of your publication and they can see the
wonderful science that you've created
everything lines up and everything is
pretty but behind every paper there is
usually a project directory somewhere on
a computer or on a computer cluster and
that does not look by far as pretty as
the finished manuscript instead it is
usually a somewhat more or less chaotic
assembly of data of code of results and
it can be quite hard to understand what
had been done to what type of research
data object in this directory at which
point by which person and it can be even
harder to recreate that data I'm fairly
convinced that each and every one of us
was once in their lifetime pointed to
some directory on some computer where
they were told there is work by some
other person please go understand it and
then they spend days if not weeks trying
to figure out what exactly happened in
this directory and I'm also quite
confident that each and every one of us
has directories like this that if they
would share them with me I would need a
significant amount of time to understand
what was going on in these directories
if I don't have access to your brain and
the last thing I'm also still quite
confident about is that every
one of us has a directory on their
computer that maybe is a couple of
months or years old but they themselves
even though they created it we'll have
problems understanding what exactly was
was done in this project directory so if
we can manage to keep our directories in
which we perform our computations and
our projects a little bit more clean
then we can ease the effort that it
takes to understand and recreate
scientific analysis quite a lot the
reason why this is a good thing is that
it eats the reproduce ability of our
science if I'm able to understand what
collaborators other researchers have
done in an analysis then I'm able to
work faster if I'm able to recreate
scientific results I am also able to
increase the reproducibility of our
field and this is why funders and
publishers start to require appropriate
research state of management practices
and this is also why scientific peers
increasingly expect research data
management from researchers and finally
as completely self motivational aspect
it obviously increases the quality and
efficiency of our own work if we can
appropriately about research data
management and if those reasons are not
enough to convince you then let me give
you one final point here the neural
science we in the lucky situation that
there are some amazing datasets that are
being made publicly available the
largest of them is probably the UK
biobank which is a really cool dataset
the problem is that this dataset is
incredibly large its magnitudes its
orders of magnitude larger than previous
public datasets and if we don't approach
datasets of that highest with good data
management practices or other with not
naive data management practices then we
will not be able to work with these
datasets in the way we want to because
the computational work flows and the
datum
and practices that we might be applying
we're just not scare scale to these
sizes the research management research
data management is quite difficult it's
usually not a skill that is taught in
graduate programs or in studies so as
researchers that operate with big data
we are faced with this difficult task
that it is really hard to get a hang on
if you never received any formal
training and what I'm going to talk
about today boils down to two tools or
concepts that I think a great start for
improving your own research data
management workflows and the first is
version control and the second is
automatic provenance capture and if
these two concepts are something that we
can these are two things that we can do
personally as researchers in our work
then our personal research data
management improved greatly in my
opinion so who here knows what version
control is who uses a version control
tool that's half of the audience that's
great for everyone who didn't raise the
hand for the first question let me
briefly introduce with version
controllers I like this comic because it
I like it
whenever I explained version control
what you can see here is the center
graduate student and he proudly saves
his menus but draft with the file name
final dot and then after a couple rounds
of revisions this poor graduate student
does not have a single menus book graph
but he has probably 35
they each differ bits a bit after each
round of revision that the only thing
that can somewhat indicate one has
changed is an increasingly complex file
name in this rather messy directory but
if we use a version control room then
just as for example is the process with
Wikipedia pages we
can drag the changes that have been made
to a document so that we can associate
the type of the change the date and the
author of the change and have a history
of changes that are associated with a
single file instead of a bunch of files
in a directory the cool thing is that we
can also interact with the history of
the file and for example check our
previous stages of the file our revert
the file to a previous state version
control can thus help to keep things
organized and keep track of changes but
one of the shortcomings of version
control tools like git is that it is
made to only work with small size data
so it's really useful really handy if
you want to write a manuscript if you
are developing code and you keep track
of your software development but it is
not made to work with large data you
cannot take your neuroimaging data set
and put it into kit then you'll get
directory will pass and depending on how
large the directory is but it can happen
quite a fast that is a problem because
data is not static sometimes we have
this misconception that data as it comes
from the MRI scanner or whatever
acquisition method we use is just
acquired once and then you get the data
and then nothing changes you compute a
couple of results from the data show
that the data is as it is but this is
actually not the case for most data most
data will change over the course of its
lifetime for example if you're working
in neural imaging you might know about
the ABCD dataset and if you have used
the ABCD dataset and you probably aware
that last December there was a mistake
reported data allowed about this dataset
because some directions for field maps
for a particular subset of the shared
data was mistakenly flipped this means
that the publicly shared data that was
distributed in
20:19 did was from the data that you can
now get after the fix was applied we
don't have a way of versioning this
change in the data then we can never be
sure what kind of input data was the one
that produced a particular outcome and
that is a dangerous situation to be in
so we need to version control not only
small changing parts but we also need to
treat data as a changing entity that
need to version control is appropriate
aversion and we talk about provenance
capture and then what we mean by data
provenance is the question of how did a
digital object came to be in its present
form and the provenance there are a
number of applications but the most
important one for us the scientist is
that having AIDS the reproducibility of
science and that's related and that's
related to questions like these who
generated a research out and when was
there done which version of the data was
used to produce an output and where did
that data come from which script created
an output in which parameters precisely
were used and how was that script
executed what is the software that is
relevant for the computation at hand and
what are the interactions of the
software with the data are the contents
all of that is relevant in order to make
a research object reproducible I need
this information to find out how I can
generate regenerate and output and to be
able to regenerate an author so there is
one tool that can help with these
concepts that I have just introduced it
can do much more but I only have two
hours and I cannot tell you everything
there is but it can do provenance
capture automatic provenance capture and
version control for control of
arbitrarily sized tiles and that tool is
called a tailored it's developed here in
the second
ethics lab and today I want to give a
brief introduction on what it is why one
should use it and how it can be used and
to sum it up in a single sentence you
can say the data light is a data
management particle there is not enough
space on this slide to this the things
that it can do and it's a very
comprehensive software that you can do
many things with the problem that I
always face when I want to talk about
something that I find to be incredibly
helpful and I want to introduce the
coolest features that there are and then
I generally lose the person I'm talking
to by getting lost in technicalities so
instead of telling you about the coolest
thing that there isn't internet and
talking about all of the technicalities
I have decided that I simply want to
show you one application in how data LED
can be used and for this I want to show
you how a reproducible research object
can be created by showing you one of the
reproducible research objects that I
have created and for this I'm following
this link and this is something that you
can also do if you have obtained the
slide then you can follow these link so
you can you can visit the very same
github repository that I'm also
currently on the reproducible research
object that I have created is a
scientific manuscript so the result of
what I'm going to show you in the next
minutes will be a PDF that is the
general standard scientific pedia
without with figures with what I'm
showing you here though is a github
repository is anyone is everyone
familiar with github that sounds like a
yes I so the cool thing about this
repository is that it's on github and
that it's publicly accessible travel you
can go ahead and take a look at it as
can anyone else with an internet
connection and a computer
the paper I'm talking about was
generated on this computer yeah that is
in front of me it would be a little bit
lame if I would show you that I can
produce the very same thing that this
computer produced another time so what
I'm doing instead is I'm using a
different machine and for this I'm
logging into I have locked into our
cluster or scientific cluster here at
the I am called useless and I'm going to
do the computations and all of that
generate all of the demonstrations here
on the computer cluster for this I'm
also going to go on one of our computers
but everything that's happening there is
not relevant for what I need to do here
I'm just waiting for the compute node to
be allocated to it okay so I'm not going
to talk too much what I'm doing I'm
going to pretend that I'm a naive
visitor at this github page and what I
will be doing is I'm just following the
instructions that were stated here in
the in the readme and the first
instruction here I said I should create
a virtual hand if you are familiar with
Python then you probably know virtual
environments you can think of them as
sort of software sandbox I can create a
virtual environment I can give it a
specific name and inside of this virtual
environment I can install specific
software modules so that I can make sure
that the software that I need is
installed but that the software also
doesn't interfere with any of the system
side packages that are installed on the
system I'm using it so what I have done
here is that I've created a virtual
environment I've called it Romana the
reason for this is mainly because this
paper is about an algorithm that is
called a mod not that this is just a
name and I've entered this virtual
environment you can see this because in
front of my little prompt I now have an
indicator which
I mean and what I'm doing now is I'm
going to create the software environment
that I need and I'm just following the
the reasoning Hume tells me to install
three things a mock no this is a patent
package that this paper is about Seaborn
it's a library I need for plotting of
the figures inside of my paper and then
lastly the tool data that now once that
is done I have created a computational
environment in which I can start work in
virtual environments I can even make
sure to install specific versions of
Python packages if I want to and later
in this workshop I will also show you
that you don't need to instruct anyone
to install specific things with data
that you can also make sure to actually
ship the software environment that you
need together with the code or data that
you want to share so the last thing that
I'm doing is that I'm going to get a
copy of this dataset and I'm going to do
this by you just keep cloning this
repository anyone who is interacting
with git and github knows that this is a
standard it command and that as long as
you have git installed you are able to
do the same thing that I'm currently
doing so with a git clone I'm obtaining
a copy of the repository that is hosted
on github
aren't you the machine that I'm
currently using and now I can spend some
time explaining the contents exploring
the contents of this repository because
currently this repository doesn't look
like any research object at all
especially not like a PDF because not a
single file in this directory is a PPA
but you can see is that there is a code
directory and that there is
descriptiveness
so yes this repository at least seems to
share code there also is a data
repository however at this moment it
looks like these data sub directories
are
there's also an image directory which
looks like it should contain figures for
a scientific manuscript but also these
things are quite empty the rest are the
sources for a lot of parts now without
further ado I'm just going to run a
single command that the readme also
instructs me to do which is the last
thing I need to do to create or recreate
the scientific output that I'm sharing
here that is me and while this is
happening it will produce a lot of
output and I will narrate a bit what you
will be seeing while it creates all of
this output so in order for me to share
a reproducible research object I
research I need to make sure a couple of
things first of all I need to share my
code then second of all I need to share
the data that is relevant to use the
code to produce the results that I'm
claiming I have produced that means that
this repository needs to be able to
share both of that you have seen that
I'm sharing the code in github
repository just as you can do with
regular Condor what is happening in the
background while this runs and prints
some algorithm details as it's
processing things with the progress past
that you might have seen in the
beginning it is downloading data that
I'm reading so what is happening is for
this paper we're using three public
datasets two of them my thing are lying
on the server Magdeburg another one lies
somewhere in Scandinavia because someone
else shared an open data set but I don't
actually you don't actually need to care
about where this data written is from
because tools in the background working
are currently taking care of downloading
the data on to the machine that you
needed and that without much work and I
cannot I don't have the time to dive
into the details of how this paper works
and you might be thinking this must be
incredibly elaborate set
and a lot of work in the background but
I can assure you that it's actually not
a novel point you to prove that it is
actually not you can see that here is
some more data being downloaded and
everything that is outputted here is
freshly generated outputs for the
manuscript the data that we're working
in this paper with is I try to later
this is really small size data the
advantage of this is that I can
demonstrate it during the top and it
only needs a couple of minutes to shoot
if I would be doing this with
neuroimaging data then that would be
just as possible as with eye tracking
data it would just take a week to
compute and it's that's not as easily
done and showcased during a talk but
there are papers out there that share
gigabytes of neuroimaging data along
with the code and then you can run just
the same small set of commands to
automatically obtain the data that they
want to apply their culture but you can
see here now is some plotting and
rendering of the data that the figures
that I have computed and now logic is
compiling the lattice sources and if I
take a look at this thing now the size
of my repository has increased a bit
importantly there is a file called main
PDF which is actually the PDF manuscript
identify out and what you can see if I
take a look for example at the image
directory is that there are freshly
concluded with ours that haven't existed
before I cloned this repository I don't
have a PDF reader on the cluster so what
I'm going to do is I'm just going to
download this thing and show to you yeah
but this is how this research objectives
after it's compiled so it's a standard
paper in the paper
tables with numerical results and
contains videos that are embedded in
this manuscript and the beautiful thing
about this completely independent of the
content of the paper is that you are
able to obtain this repository
completely freely available and can
validate whether the claims I'm making
in this paper that you might have found
published in some journal are actually
sound you can also say hey I have an
improvement to suggest you can get the
code and you can try it out or you can
see whether the whether the code also
runs on different data are what happens
if the data changes so let me quickly
show you let me quickly go back to my
slides I'm going to keep the terminal
and the slides right next to each other
for the rest of this talk and I'm a bit
sorry that I don't have all time that I
would want to talk about the details
about how this reproducible research
object works but I have written it up so
if you're interested in how this thing
works and I can assure you that it's and
surprisingly easy task
there is a step by step instruction with
code examples so if you're interested
you can read this it's a single page and
then create something like this myself
the most astonishing aspect of this
paper for me however is not that I can
generate a PDF manuscript from scratch
that is okay it's a nice lattice and
make gimmick what I find especially cool
is that I'm able to share my data
alongside with my code on a page such as
fit so I have a vastly simplified
procedure to make my science available
to whoever I want and in the wake of my
talk I'm going to come back
a couple of times to showcase some
advanced principles that I'm going to
talk about with the example of this
repository here so that he could see a
couple of things in there but this post
has to complete right about how this is
done so let me summarize what data lat
is in brief the most important thing is
that it is a command line to lose
whenever I want to interact with
something that is data that I do this in
a terminal and then append a command to
it it's available for all my job writing
system so whether you use Linux Mac OS
10 Windows you can use it especially
cool though if your Linux so it's very
useful on a scientific test data lad is
built on top of two tools it and good
annex those tools are version control
tools and you can see that this is a
version control tool because this
repository here has just as any git
repository a version restore history and
I can find out what has happened to this
repository at which time during its
creation and the beautiful thing about
such a good history is that I can first
of all know about this you can know
about it if I share my repository with
you and I can interact with the system
so if I don't like a change that was
done I can revert it for example okay
with data let you can version control
arbitrarily large content so with data
that you don't need to care about how
large or what type of data you have you
can just version control it you can
easily share and obtain data and you can
create computational reproducible data
analysis that you can then share and
data lad in general is completely to
main agnostic so you can use it not only
for neural science you can also use it
to manage to your personal music library
and this is why the examples that I'm
going to tap
also mostly remain agnostic but it will
be a very good exercise and I assume
quite easy to see if you to think about
how you can take in remain agnostic
example and then related to whatever use
case you may have for it and management
so what I'm going to do today are
introducing some basic concepts and
commands there is not much time to dive
into the details of everything and there
are also a lot of other things that this
tool can do but I only have two hours
but if you're interested in more than
you can read the data that handbook the
data that handbook is a free and open
source online book you can visit this
webpage and you can also visit and you
can also obtain a PDF copy of it and we
have created the data that handbook and
we continue to expand it to give people
interested in data let and in debt
management a complete educational cars
and everything that you can do with it
the handbook consists of two parts one
is the beta two major parts one is the
basics that's an educational pass so to
say so that you have a continuous
narrative that you can work through
self-paced the narrative in this book is
the main agnostic so it's actually
envision yourself as a student in a
college class on Datanet that is called
angel at 101 in the wake of this curse
you create a dataset and you collect
some readings and version control them
you will make notes about things that
you learn and so forth you have a
midterm project in which you need to
submit a date analysis project we're
going to see some of that later during
the code demonstrations and then there's
the second part that is called the use
cases and these use cases among them is
also the reduces of paper they detail
step-by-step instructions on how to
solve common data management problems
and those are shorter and less technical
but they give an overview of the things
that are possible with that so if you're
interested in learning more than I can
talk about today just check out the hand
poopins you can find all of the content
it also please
don't hesitate to ask any questions
whatever is on your mind just a spit and
I will try to answer as best as I can
so the first thing I want to talk about
is the concept of data that the concept
of data that is a data set and you have
seen a data set already because among
others it's this git repository that
around a data set can be any directory
that is managed by date alert and this
means that any directory on your
computer can be managed by data that you
can either install data sets you have
seen that when I cloned the repository
on github tip from github and installed
it locally on the cluster or you can
create them from scratch and collect
some inputs inside of them and you can
nest them I will show you later what
this precisely means but for now you can
think of nesting as link subdirectories
in a dataset or in a directory and in
order to experience the data set I'm now
going to do some live coding
instructions and if you want to follow
along then you can use your computer now
and there is a part of the handbook that
has all of the code that I'm going to
execute listed as well so if you want to
follow along then you can go to handbook
the data let block then scroll all the
way to the bottom and then there is the
section code lists from chapters and
what I'm going to start with is code
from chapter 1 the data set places and
then you will find code snippets in the
numbered list and you can just take the
code snippet and copy it into a terminal
to execute it you see that all of these
code snippets are numbered in the output
that you're going to be seeing on the
terminal and I will show you you will
see that I also have the code snippet
numbering so that you can orient
yourself a bit and the way I'm going to
do all of that is via a remote control
terminal so that I can kind of try to
focus
so let me quickly set this up is there a
question up to this point okay so what
I'm also going to do is I'm going to do
all of that on the castle because that
is it it has a faster internet
connection in the wireless yeah so the
code that I'm using comes from the data
net handful this is why we're following
a domain agnostic and educational
narrative you have to share with me with
that but I was easy to relate what I'm
doing to what you need to be doing and
we will start the narrative by creating
a data set and to create a data set
there is a single command that you need
to execute and that is the data let's
create command the only required
argument that the data to create command
has is pass with the name of the
directory you want to create so in this
case I'm naming a data set data that one
one you can see in this command as well
is a configuration option with the dash
C flag of call text to get I don't have
the time to cover exactly what this
configuration does but it's one of
several configurations that you can use
to create suitable default behaviors for
your data set depending on the situation
and what to use it for if I execute as
command then data that will create a new
repository you can see here that data
that creates an output and a summary of
the outcome of a command in this case we
can see that the command create ran and
that the outcome of this command was
okay if I now navigate into this
directory and just list the outputs with
the LS command then I will not be seeing
any output because this directory is
created empty the whole thing that I
talked about though is that they
let's have a revision history and we can
take a look at this revision history by
using get tools because the dataset is
simultaneously a good repository and you
can use any git command of your choice
to work with it as well and you can
explore the history the version history
it has with tools for example as good
luck so if I take a look at what the
current version history of my dataset is
then this is as small as a data since
history can be and I'm going to use it
to introduce everyone who is not
familiar with a view like this into what
we're seeing so what we're seeing here
are two entries in our history each of
these entries is identified with this 40
character sentence this is referred to
as a checksum or a hash and it is one
way to identify a so-called commit so a
single entry in your history you can see
that there is an author associated with
the entry in the history and you can see
that there is a date and a time at which
this particular change took place the
last thing you can see in this view is
that there is what is called a commit
message this is a human readable
description that you should usually
create to make it easier for a human
upon first seeing history to make sense
of what has happened in these two cases
I haven't written the commit message but
it was data led and currently it's also
not entire like here
what these commit messages mean that the
next commit messages will be we will be
writing for ourselves okay the reason
yes you mean you mean this data yes for
most of the things that data that does
it will prevent a large data level there
are commands for which data led will
produce automatic commit messages but
for the next few things that we will do
we will create the muscles but you will
also see more generated by regiment okay
so the reason why we have this history
is because there are a couple of tools
working in background if we list also
the hidden contents in this directory
with the - a flag - the list command
then we can see that there are a couple
of hidden directories and files in this
case it's the data let directory and the
target directory and the target
attribute file it is not relevant to
understand what is inside of this time
like trees to use it the only thing that
one should keep in mind is you should
really pop so let's work with this data
set the first thing we want to explore
is how to put data inside of this data
set and to the end version control it
for this staying with the educational
narrative and we're just going to
download some PDFs for a reading list
and for this I'm going to create a
directory i call it books so that my
data set currently consists only of an
empty directory and what I will do then
is I'm just going to download a couple
of books from the internet and save them
into this books directory I'm doing all
of that from the command line because it
allows me to remote-control this
terminal but obviously you can also
visit this webpage click on downloads
then save the PDF into the data set of
your choice I'm just doing it because I
like the tunnel so what is happening now
I'm using the W get command to download
this to PDF files and then I will save
them under two names T LCL of PDF and by
the Python the PDF into my box directory
here you can see where they are and the
question is what does data let know
think about this new content in my
dataset I can query the state of the
dataset with the data the state is Kumar
and this will report on content that is
untracked
modified by any other way not clean and
in this case
it will be part that we have an
untracked directory if you're not
familiar with git tools then you can
just as well also use the git status
command to do this data that they just
has a slightly different way of
reporting and in some ways is more
powerful in some ways it's less useful
than get status so in order to so at
this point the books in my directory are
untracked this means that they are not
part of the history of my data set yet
and instead data they're just reports
that there is content that it is
basically not a well because the data
said content needs to be consciously
added to the data set in order to for it
to be version control and in order to
version control any content in your data
set you need to give it to the data that
save come up the days of the save
command will work as is it doesn't have
required arguments but it is very
helpful if you attach a commit message
to the data let's say from did you do
that with the - an option and just with
a git commit message you try to append a
concise and human readable description
of the change that you are doing to the
data set now if I do data let's say with
just a commit message then you will
again see you know status summary of the
command and you will see that there were
successful safe operation in our data
set and now I can take a look at how
this looks in the history of the data
set so what we can see here is that here
is a new commit
i altered this moment and here's the
commit message that I attach to it this
town here looks a little bit confusing
it's something that one gets fairly used
to easily but the gist of it is that
this entry in the history certifies that
I have added two PDFs to our data set so
this means that
version control consists essentially of
two commands we are using data let you
create a data set with data like create
and then you do a change and you do data
let say and those are the two commands
that are relevant in order to version
control files this is easy enough so
that I can spend five minutes on talking
about best practices for actually doing
version control because you have seen
that if I do a data that's safe without
any additional arguments it will save
everything that is modified or untracked
in my data set to its history the
powerful thing about the version is free
in the data set as they may get
directory a git repository is that you
can interact with the history but
interactions with the history are made
especially easy if you save changes in
very small and meaningful units so in
this case as I've done here I've added
two books and they don't have that much
in common with each other it would be
better if I would say them individually
because that would allow me to revert
the edition of the book to my data set
easily later because I want to make sure
that I have a small change in my data
set if you are developing code then you
would also save only those code changes
that are meaningful unit and not
simultaneous work on two unrelated words
because that would make it very hard to
revert such changes in the future okay
so to introduce some best practices I'm
just going to download another book so
I'm using again the W get command and
now I'm downloading another PDF to save
it in there and what I can do now is I
can show you how to save a singular
change that was made to the dataset I
can do this first a query data let the
data store the thinks about it it says I
have an untracked open this directory
and now I can use the data let's save
command and append a past will change
that I want to commit and then do the
data myself if I would have mama
vacations at medidata said at this point
then only the part that I'm specifying
would be saved
okay however this is still a little bit
skeptical because I obtained something
from the web and at this point I'm the
only one who knows where this book came
from and this doesn't need to be a book
it can be for example code that you find
on the Internet by that a collaborator
shares with you so there is no
provenance about where that input data
came from and there is a data net
command that can make sure of capturing
the provenance of any file that you add
to your data set that comes from the web
yes
good luck again and that is the data
that down your download URL so if you
have something that comes from the web
and you can put the URL into the data in
the download command specify the data
set that you want to save it and in this
case it's the current data set this is
where there is data set dot which is the
UNIX expression this data set and
currently in I can append the commit
message and then also a path to where I
want to save whatever I'm downloading it
to and if I execute this the net alert
will take care of downloading the
content that I specified with the URL
secretly reporting where this content
came from so that it is embedded in the
data set information and then also make
sure to save it to my history so if I
now check out what is books I have for
PDFs and if I do a data that status now
I have a clean data sets of datas you
can see that it is clean because the
data read status command does not return
anything okay so this was data that
doesn't frequently change usually we
don't change PDF files so what I'm going
to do next is I'm going to show you how
to version control things that
frequently change what I'm doing here
all in the wake of this education
narrative I'm creating a notes that is
too far for your own use cases this can
be a code script
that you keep developing and again here
I'm going to go a detour to do all of
that in a domino I'm using here
documents for that that allow me to just
take text and put it into a file from
the terminal but you can just use any
editor of the trice write code save your
script file that you have done with any
GUI your editor and then continue I'm
just doing it to use the terminal so if
I execute this here document I have
created a fire note so tasty and this is
the this is the only thing that I'm
doing with this statement in the
terminal
so if I now do a date and status I will
have an untracked file in my data set as
expected and in order to save this file
I'm just using the data to save command
with a meaningful commit message now
this file is long to my data set now I'm
just going to append someone owes to my
file in this case I'm going to append
note on how data let's save works if I
modify this file by appending this
additional no to it I will see that the
state of this file and my data set is
not untracked but it is modified because
comparing the previously tracked stayed
of notes such HT and the current state
will show that there was a difference
but it'll add and also forget and in
order to save this modification I can
just do another data let's say so that's
it and if I now take a look at the
history of my dataset then my history
will not only show me that I have done
two notes in the notes of txt file but
handily it will also directly summarize
or rather show the changes that have
been done to this that's quite handy ok
so this means to just give a quick
summary of where we are by creating a
data set you have a directory on your
computer in which you can version
control
data sets contents of any size if you
want you can do this by just adding data
or modifying existing data in the
dataset and then running data let's say
if you save meaningful units of change
and it had two helpful commit message
then you can also be very helpful to any
human consumers of your data set
but in principle version control is to
two commands create and save so for
quick summary you can create a data set
with data create you can apply
configurations even though I don't have
time to talk about them there are some
that create meaningful and useful
defaults data set behavior a dataset has
a history to track files and hunted
occasions to them and you can explore
them with it tools or external tools you
can save the state of the data set or
individual modifications with internet
safe and you should make sure to use
concise commit messages for human
consumption to describe the change that
would mean then the daintily download
URL is a convenient helper to download
content from the web save them to the
data set automatically and also record
their origin as well data that status is
the command that you would frequently
turn to to get an update of the current
state of the data set and with just
these two commands of these view
commands you get from here - to this so
instead of having a chaotic directory in
which you rely on fire namings you have
a orderly version control data set and
especially if you're not used to using
data if you have students that are not
used to using it this is a very fast and
very easy way to get version control
going
however the version control is only one
aspect of data management and so I'm
going to dive a bit deeper into what
data that can do and I will show you how
one can consume data sets and that is
obtain a shared copy of a data set
and for this continuing in this
educational narrative I'm going to show
you how to obtain a public data set that
is shared via date alert and this is a
data set that contains podcasts about
the philosophical seminar it's a very
nice book for this I'm going to make a
directory because I want to keep
everything clean and then I'm using the
data that phloem command to obtain the
dataset it is shared on github from this
URL and I want to save it into this path
that I'm optionally giving here so in
this newly created directory I want to
have this data set into a directory or
dataset that I call on that what I'm
doing here as well is I'm specifying the
data set I'm doing this in because I
want to link the data set within my top
level data set I will show you in a bit
why this is really handy to do if I
execute this the command will download
or clone the repository and afterwards I
see that I have more content in this
data set I'm listing the hierarchy of
this data set here and I'm using only
the directories because there are a lot
of files but what you can see here is
that I have this long now data set and
this contains two separate please so
let's take a look at what the contents
of these sub directories are if I list
them then there are hundreds of mp3
files
I hope the contrast you know is good
enough so all of these files that you
can see listed here are podcasts mp3
files there are literally hundreds of
them inside of this data set now you may
be curious how the download of several
hundred mp3 files happen so fast because
the download or the clone of this data
set merely took a couple of seconds the
reason for this is that the contents of
these files are not present in this
current
so I would want to open any of these mp3
files I would fail this is a final
concept that it's incredibly useful so
if I ask this directory how large it is
with the user disk usage command then it
will tell me it is absolutely tiny this
helps me download this data set
incredibly fast but if I now query data
let to tell me what is the over what is
the total size of the contents that can
be in this data set then it can tell me
for this particular data set that there
are actually more than 15 gigabytes of
contents that I can potentially retrieve
if you have a newer imaging data set
with hundreds of subjects then it is
very helpful to be able to download very
lean and slim data set in a couple of
seconds and then have metadata
availability information on all of these
files to see what of the files you are
actually needing so if you have a data
analysis project in imaging you may only
want to use the structural data there's
no need to also download terabytes of
Hearts no data but the data set like
that you can explore the hierarchy and
then only obtain those contents of the
data set on demand for preserving the
option to obtain any of the contents
that you want if I want to get a file
then I'm using the data that get command
and then in the most simple case I can
just specify a complete directory or as
here a single file if I do this then
data light will take care of obtaining
the data that belongs to this file you
will see that here is the status get
okay so this command succeeded and I as
a consumer of this data set don't
actually need to care where it came this
case it came from a podcast that is
published over there I can now quarry
how much of the data that is in
principle present in this data set it's
already downloaded so you can see that I
only downloaded a fraction of the total
size and
I can also download a couple of files by
just listing them one after another and
what I want to show you here is what
happens if I tried to get a file that
was already retrieved the first one was
the one that I had already retrieved if
I specify a file that is already there
again then daisyland were just not done
with it it will say I succeeded in
downloading two of the path but you
wanted that the third one was just
enough needed already happened
so for consuming datasets
this is the file hierarchy here you can
see that we have a sub dataset inside of
this so-called super or top level data
set initially we only have a very
lightweight lightweight dataset it's
only small parts that are present and
metadata information about which files
and principal available and then
afterwards you can obtain any content
you can also obtain all content at once
via data little bit the cool thing about
this dataset is that this one has a
standalone history so if I now use skip
lock again then I can find out who was
the person who created a chat with
dataset and looking here at the
beginning of the version history of this
dataset and I can see that
aha Michael honker was the one who
created this data set back in 2018 and
if I wanted to I could find out all of
the things that this author decided to
put into the history of his data set but
let's find out
so okay first of all I'm very
educational cause I'm going to make a
note about this
okay so now we are in the super data set
in the data set that we ourselves
created data lat 101 and the interesting
thing to find out is how does the super
data set see the addition of the sub
data set in its own history and for this
we can take a look at this commit
summary this is the addition of a sub
dataset you can see that there is
nothing like the previous lock of the
directory that I just showed you there
is nothing about edit mp3 files nothing
about engine hunger or an author that
you're not aware of it's me that does a
change that is a bit critically
summarized here but the most important
part of this summary is this commit
chocen and I just want you to memorize
the first six characters office it's DC
c35 because this so-called sub-project
commit can be found in the sub data set
again so if we navigate into the sub
data and then take another good look at
history we can see that we can find this
commit hash that is tracked in the super
data set as being the most recent change
in the sub dataset this means this that
we have a record of the precise version
state of the sub directory sub data set
in the super data set and this sounds a
bit abstract but I'm going to show you
what the advantage of that is by going
back into my paper because
viola was so first of all I'm going to
show you that this data set has a couple
of subtitles quite a few much when I was
writing this paper I had all of the
results computed and then I was writing
the discussion and I found a paper that
reported that in one of the data
that I was using there was a labeling
error in the input data that I used and
I can show you this because it is a sub
dataset here so if I go into this sub
data set this is data set that was
shared by people I actually don't know
personally they made their day to
publicly available which is wonderful
someone called Richard Anderson back in
2016 created this data set and then
there was a paper that reported a
mistake in the data sometime in 2018 and
when I found out about this mistake
I went paranoid lis back to my own
computation subject oh god is that fixed
in my data and I found out that no the
the error in the data set is still there
then in 2019 I contacted the office well
gets back with a poor request and said
hey there is a paper that reports a
mistake in your data here is a fix for
that and they decided that this is
something that would be good to be fixed
in their dataset and they integrated
this change to their data into their
dataset this means that the data you
could download from github in 2019 the
most recent version different from the
data that you will have downloaded in
2018 and that's problematic if you think
about this happening to any of your
large studies if you have a data set a
new emerging data set that you use once
to create your results and then later on
that changed happens because a mistake
for example was found and fixed then
this public neuroimaging data set
changes but then someone else or
yourself tries to replicate your results
it is possible that they fail and if you
are not able to point to which version
of the data set your code was using its
input then it will definitely be a very
painful experience for me I was able to
quickly update the current version of
the sub dataset by having it registered
with a specific version and in this
setup I can even say okay
compute my results again with the 2018
label and let's find out how much
changes with if I compare it for 2019
later that's an incredibly helpful thing
to have okay so let's continue after a
quick additional summary so if we talk
about data step nesting then the super
dataset
I need top-level dataset registers the
origin of its sub dataset so where were
they retrieved from work and I find the
data that they contain and that in a
precise version and I have the
flexibility to also to also just set the
version I want the sub dataset to be so
quick
come on submarine you can install a
dataset of a dataset known you can
either do it on its own
for example as with the paper repository
there you just need to specify the
source this can be a URL or a path or a
data collection but you can also install
it as sub datasets to register them in
the supinator sub and this is where the
status adoption becomes relevant upon
installation of the data spectrum you
have small files and metadata but a data
nerd get will then retrieve the actual
file content if you decide that you want
to have it this spares you a lot of time
and download upon the initial clone of
the dataset you can use data load status
with the annex and then it's all flags
to query about the amount of site at the
size of the data set in total and data
set to preserve the history and the
super data set regards the version of
the sub data set
ok so what I want to talk about now is
how to create a reproducible data
analysis with data that I like this
comic a lot to introduce or producible
analysis you have the professor here who
points again a pro graduate student to a
code directory or project directory that
either a person
left the lab years ago or the graduate
student himself a couple of years ago
created and what this comic then
exemplifies in this exchange here are
the instructions for use it ducted is
the code commented not likely where are
the files most this exemplifies how
difficult it can be to recreate and
understand what has happened in a data
analysis and I want to show you how this
can be mitigated with data net and this
is a lot of the automatic provenance
capture aspect that I talked about if
you want to follow along then you can go
and check out the code snippets from the
tenth chapter this chapter is called
Yoda and the reason for this is that it
also introduces some data management
principles for our data organization and
those principles are called the Yoda
principle and I need to spend a couple
of minutes to give you a rough sketch of
what these Yoda principals are for the
latest things to make sense so the Yoda
principles are three principles that are
used for organizational organizational
principles for data sets we're going to
summarize them really quickly here if
you want to do a data analysis it is
beneficial if you keep everything clean
and as modular as you can have it this
applies to two different dimensions of
your data set and both are exemplified
below first of all you can see in this
graphic here the evolution of all parts
of a later scientific paper you can see
this is the representation of the simple
data set and they are linked to a higher
level data set during the process one of
the principles is that you shouldn't
touch or modify the raw data when you
compute an analysis with them because
that this that makes it impossible to
find out later potentially what has been
done is that you want to preserve any
input data in its state and then just
to add the results that you create from
them in new place away from the input
data to keep everything clean and
modular so what you can see here this
first dataset is the raw data as it
comes for example from an MRI scanner
you don't use the raw data to work with
for data analysis so the next
transformation that you do is you
convert it for example to Nifty's how
about your dad comes to Nifty's and you
sawed them in the bit standard to make
it nice dataset you can use a lot of
code with now your nifty files and bit
standard are still not the ones that you
want to apply your code to you actually
want to pre-process the data instead of
modifying your bits converted data said
you create a new one with this data set
as input data that you run through a
from our I prep another pre-processing
pipeline to get your data pre-processed
and then you have to graduate students
each of them does the different analysis
and each of these analysis analysis one
engine Ellis beef use the pre-processed
data as their input they simply install
it as a sub dataset and then conduct
their analysis and finally these
analysis datasets again the input of the
final paper that your graduate student
can then share just as I was able to
share my paper with the world and from
the paper in principle one can find out
about this whole chain of events and one
can digress if you if you want to let
them you are the person sharing your
dataset you can make sure how much of
the provenance of the contents of your
datasets you actually want to share you
can make sure that you can trace every
single step that leads to this paper
within your research object that is and
that's a really powerful thing to have
but it requires that you work module
early and clean but is also part of this
is this file hierarchy here you can see
that everything inside
a single data set here is quite clean so
you have a dedicated cold directory in
which you have the code and the scripts
or even tests that you can use to test
the code and then you have a dedicated
inputs directory in which your data is
linked as sub data sets and instead of
modifying these input data directly you
just save them for example in an output
direct you can also have some files that
are useful for human consumption for
example of with me or Dodson you can
also have software environment but you
tab with it if you want to but this in
general exemplifies how to keep things
already significantly more organized
than just putting everything in single
directory okay and importantly in order
to make sharing your pasta and
computational infrastructures work
everything that you do inside of the
data set needs to be self-contained so
that's a very straightforward thing but
if you develop code then you obviously
need to input relative paths that are
based on the data set you are currently
in and not absolute paths that would
make it impossible for your code to run
on a different system where you don't
have the same paths
okay and the next thing is all about
provenance capture because in order to
have a comprehensive and reproducible
data analysis you need to record where
anything that you got from elsewhere
came from and what you did to it and
also that everything you created
yourself from inputs or whatever needs
to be properly documented which script
created what which data was used tensile
force and in which software was all of
that done and the good thing is that all
of that is done by data that if you use
it appropriately I'm going to show you
how to do this
by continuing a bit further in the book
the narrative then continues with a
midterm project and in the narrative one
student needs to submit a data analysis
midterm project in latish Heather's
for this we create a sub dataset that
holds
our data analysis project I'm going to
do this with the data like create
command again and I'm giving the name it
on project but there are two things that
I'm implying here the first is the
configuration option that's called ulah
ulah is one configuration option that
applies very useful defaults to any data
analysis data set and then I'm also
taking care of linking this sub data set
to the top level data set because I want
to have this data set recorded in my
super dataset if I execute this then I'm
creating inside of data and 101a sub
dataset that is called middle the next
thing that I want to do for my analysis
project and at this point I should
probably tell you what type of analysis
project are you doing to go quickly back
into the slides again yeah the narrative
I'm just going to do a super simple
standard exam for data analysis so
everyone is probably aware of the iris
dataset where you have four variables
length and width of sepals and petals of
three different species of iris flowers
that a introductory data science example
for classification analysis so what I
want to do in this dataset is I just
want to develop a spurt that that's such
a classification analysis so the first
thing I want to do is I want to get the
input data and link it appropriately I
have made sure that there is input data
publicly available this is on github and
I'm cloning that linked to the midterm
project data set into a directory that I
call input once this is done I have
linked my dataset to the input it is
using and obviously you can create your
input dataset so if you have a data
directory lying around you can create
transformer an existing data set a
directory into a data set and then just
install it into any analysis
they just sort of want what I'm doing
next is I can quickly show you how this
looks like what I'm doing next is I'm
actually developing your script and
again I'm going to do this with a here
document that writes a lot of text into
my terminal at this point it's not super
important to understand what is going on
but it's a simple Python script that
does a K nearest neighbor classification
and analysis so what you can see here is
basically that I using the input data
and you can see that and then I'm
creating two and if I save this execute
this then I have an untracked file in my
data set this is the book that I've
generated in code I can save this I can
even add a tag if you are used to that
concept to have a another nice
identifier of the state of my data set
and you call it ready for analysis
because now I have input data and after
code and if I save this then I am able
to run this to run this book the way I
would run the Python script from the
command line is I use my Python
interpreter and then specify a path to
the code script that I'm using but if I
would just execute this file then it
would produce all of these outputs and
later on neither I know anyone else
would have an easy time figuring out how
that is done especially if it's a data
analysis that is more complex of this
where you have hundreds of figures and
you select one of them to be your final
figure for your people so in order to
capture
of a script execution I can wrap the
command that I want to run into what is
called a data led run command this
command takes a couple of inputs and it
also does more than I am
today having time to talk about so what
you can see here is that the first thing
I'm going to give to it is a
human-readable commit message well I'm
making my life easy in the future to
understand what I have done but and then
doing is I'm specifying inputs the input
flag also does something very handy it
will make sure to retrieve any file
content that is not yet there so if I
have input that comes from a sub data
set that is cloned but not yet retrieved
then specifying that will make sure to
always have all of the necessary data
available that is needed for the
computation and I'm also specifying the
output files because the output flag
takes care of making files modifiable
should I ever want to overwrite them or
change them and the last thing I'm
giving to this command which is the only
required argument that this mod has is
the command that I want to exit so I
could run Python 3 coats grip pipe to
execute my analysis but here I'm
wrapping it in today to lead one to have
data let run take care of the provenance
capture of everything so if I run all of
that right okay so what what I did here
is I wrapped a normal command execution
in my data at one command and this
command you can see in this output here
took care of saving all of the results
and it saved them together with my
commit message in my history so if I
take a look at the history now I can see
that here I have a recent commit that is
my commit message and if I take a look
at the very last commit here then you
can see
this thing this thing looks a bit weird
I can explain what it is but it's made
for computers and not for humans you
will see later why this is for computers
but this thing is a machine readable
record of what was done and which
command was carried out and which
results were created by this I will
quickly show you what this c'mon
produced by showing you the PNG image
that I created so I know because I don't
have any viewer on the cluster I'm using
I just downloaded the PNG file and I can
open it and I can say wow that's a
wonderful figure great cool and I submit
my manuscript to publish um and then the
reviewers say that is all perfect work
but see these colored dots here they are
red and green and you're being a huge
with anyone with a red and green
colorblindness how would they ever one
will be able to to the Saudis yet the to
column so what you wouldn't to do in
this case is you would need to change
the color let's say this is nine months
after you generated this video and it's
kinda hard to find out what what
actually happened to this video but with
the provenance capture we can find out
what was done to this pass first of all
we can carry what happened to this thing
and then we can find out which person if
it's a project with many collaborators
but certainly helpful created this al
could win and why and how
depending on how with the commit
messages and we also have a machinery of
a record of what powered was computed so
if I want to now change the color scheme
which I'm just going to do right
so if I want if I want to change the
color scheme I can go here and then just
say let's take blues that's a nice color
scheme I'm going to do data that status
on this to see uh I have modified my
script I can do a data let's save update
color scheme to be color blindness
friendly and afterwards I can take I can
have a computer take care of recomputing
what I need to recompute because if I
take a look at my history and check out
the identification the commit hash for
the previous data led run procedure I
can just copy this MIT hash and then
plug it into a command that is quality
to let rerun I can also give a commit
message to it and then I'm going to
specify the commit hash and once I do
this data that will take care of finding
out how this particular commit in my
history was executed and then it will
just recompute everything and I can show
you that this how this what this
resulted in by just downloading the file
again and I can open it up
and then I see okay great
that's blue now perfect and that can be
a rather complex analysis or analysis
that is just as simple as this one but
you don't need to take care of
remembering how you execute it and
produce this result because there's two
I have multiple change however for just
recording I can tell you this I can show
you this in the summary in the commit
summary of the rerun so I have reran the
previous executed run command and this
created an entry in my history but
unlike the first run command where I
have I can show you that where I have
two additions to my data set so I can
see here over there there are two change
piles the prediction report and the PNG
images if I go and check out what the
output of the rerun amount reduced it is
just the single file that I modified
because I adjusted the color scheme
which is the PNG image so anything that
is left unmodified by rerunning a
previous command will actually not
change everything okay so I'm quickly
going to continue here with some I'm
going to quickly continue here with this
narrative so I can also be kind to
humans that obtain my data set and
create a readme file so that others can
quickly find out what is the content of
this data set if I publish it to github
that's not entirely relevant to what I
want to show you next but that's just a
good practice to also be kind to humans
here because the next thing that I want
to show you is that even though I'm in
this data set
sharing data and code it is not a
guarantee that the computations actually
succeed so because the oh sorry he's at
first of all visitation led run summary
so this is how they do that run works
you have an data set of one state and
data led run manages to capture all of
the changes that the execution of any
arbitrary command does to the data side
and saves it with a human readable
summary if you
provide a commit message and with a
machine-readable record that enables
real computations done by your machine
it takes care of getting input data
specified and it can take care unlocking
but I don't have the time to go into the
details of what that exactly is output
files so that they can modify it if
someone reruns this but if I would share
my script with you then the script may
not be able to run because you lack the
necessary software environment maybe
you're not used to Python programming or
maybe you don't have the particular
versions of the Python modules that are
required I can show you that by just
entering a virtual environment that I
know doesn't have the correct software
for requisites so now I am in a
environment that is different from a
user environment in this environment
just doesn't have all of the PI packages
I have installed for myself
and if I now do the same data let every
one is before which previously worked
then you will see that this source
throws an error because module not hung
no module named panelist since this
software simply isn't installed and
that's an outcome that I kind of want to
prevent if I share my data and code with
you for you as my collaborator or
audience I want to make it as easy as
possible
to verify my results so what I can do is
in a data layer data set to also attach
a software environment to the
computations I'm doing and I'm doing I
can do this with an with a data that
extension this data that extension is
called data that containers and by a
software that is encapsulated in a
software container is anyone not
familiar with the concept of a software
container cool so you can with the data
lab extension you can take any tacos and
you lowers your container and register
it to your data set and then ship your
data sets together with this container
and I'm going to show you how this is
done
the first thing I'm going to do is I'm
going to add a software container to the
data set
adding means I'm registering the
location where that software container
can be found inside of my data set in
this case I have created a singularity
image and put it on singularity Hut and
it can be found publicly available under
this URL and then I'm just using the
data that containers add command with a
name that I want to give this software
environment here I'm using mid-term
software and they specify the URL that
it comes from if I do that then the
singularity image will be downloaded and
registered to my data set this may take
a while because this ingenuity image is
a bit larger than what we previously
downloaded but it's also very tiny
singularity image because it only
contains Python packages so once this is
done I have a registered container in my
dataset I take a look at the history
then I can also find out information on
this addition to my data set with this
addition to the handbook we'll explain
what the contents of this commitment
which means precisely for now you have
to be satisfied with knowing that it is
there in order to now execute my
analysis inside of the software
container i'm using the data like
containers one command so instead of
using data let run i'm using data like
containers one this command is
structured exactly as the data LED run
command the only difference is that I'm
giving the container name to the command
as well and if I execute this and
remember I'm in an environment that
doesn't have the necessary Python
prerequisites installed then data that
will take care of executing my script
inside of the software environment that
I'm sorry I forgot something what has
happened oh yeah right because the
previous command people on execute
clean leash that left some modifications
in my data head I'm going to do a get it
clean data set okay so now I can run
with this command if you want to get the
details into why was that one command
currently possible I have to refer you
to the handbook but but now that I can
attach a software container to my
computation I am able to execute this
computation even though I don't have the
correct software in the environment are
currently in and that's a really handy
tool because this allows me to give you
everything to recompute and verify and
work on and collaborate on the results
that I want you to have so as a final
summary here this is a summary of the
data that containers run command and in
addition to everything the data that run
come on can do it can also register a
singularity or docker container that
either lives on your system or in any
other public Internet source added to
your dataset and execute the commands
that you wanted to inside of the
software environment okay and that was
everything that yes yes absolutely yeah
so if you are curious on using data but
because it was intriguing then to get
started I would advise that you take a
look at the data live handbook because
there you can find out everything that
you want without having to listen to me
in your own speech and for precisely the
things that you want to achieve with
data lat
it's free and open source and it's
continuously developed if you want to
know something that is not yet in the
handbook you can write a request and we
then see that the content gets added and
you can also for a nice start with data
that check out some publicly available
datasets for example every single data
set that is published on open Errol is
available as a data
they said you can obtain it onto your
computer with a single command with a
single data let alone one month and then
you can explore the looks and feels of a
neuroimaging data set yourself the
acknowledgments data net is developed
here by Michael hunger and Benjamin
Poldark as well as collaborators in the
u.s. story has takes care of maintaining
it annex and there are a lot of
contributors to the software the
handbook I received help from Laura and
Michael and also Lisa who is here and
it's with many other contributors and if
you have questions then I'm very happy
to take them
[Applause]